+++
title = 'The Causes' # alt title: 'Why It's Happening'
+++

As climate change has worsened, colonialism has been digitized into data colonialism. Data colonialism is a new, digitalized version of colonialism that has created new ways forms of colonial exploitation, which have expanded those same impacts. Data colonialism is the major cause behind this massive problem we have with AI and the environment, which explains why several corporations like Google and Microsoft have begun developing new regional hubs at profitable locations. While establishing regional hubs for various businesses doesn’t directly harm first-world countries, it takes away from and competes against the natives of second and third-world countries that rely on those same resources. Since AI and its data centers require millions of gallons of potable water per day, this creates a question in morality behind the government as to who should be prioritized: Their people or the advancement of technology. 

Unfortunately, government officials in countries such as Uruguay and Chile have prioritized their economy's future rather than their nations' citizens. Corporations attempt to exploit regions that are profitable to them and have less strict environmental regulations. In other words, vulnerable regions such as Latin America, Africa, and Asia are “cash cow” locations for the IT industry. Government officials hope that introducing and developing IT infrastructure will bring prosperity to the economy. However, as Steven Gonzalez Monserrate states, “This is not a permanent industry. It is extractive like, like mines”.[^1] For context, Montevideo was the first capital to declare day zero—when a city’s water supply is nearly depleted. However, the Uruguayan government and Google disregarded this issue and decided to begin constructing a new Google regional hub in Canelones—roughly a 50-minute drive from Montevideo—which has begun in September of this year. This raises several concerns for the natives of Uruguay. How will taxes be affected now with this plan in place? How can government officials prioritize the future of IT rather than the safety of their people? As living conditions continue to worsen for natives, conflict will arise between those dealing with the aftermaths versus government officials responsible for these decisions. 

[^1]: McGovern, Gerry, and Sue Branford. “The Cloud vs. Drought: Water Hog Data Centers Threaten Latin America, Critics Say.” *Mongabay Environmental News*, 2 Nov. 2023, https://news.mongabay.com/2023/11/the-cloud-vs-drought-water-hog-data-centers-threaten-latin-america-critics-say/.
